Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we are going to continue working on our search overlay JavaScript.
Let's dive right into the action.
So the first thing that I want to work on or address is when someone opens up the search overlay, you'll
notice that just barely behind this transparent layer, you can see the main Web page in the background
and notice that I'm still allowed to scroll up and down and you can see the page in the background reflecting
that.
Now, I think that's potentially very awkward or confusing for visitors of the Web site.
So what I want to do is as soon as you open up the search overlay, I want to remove the ability to
scroll the main page.
Now, I've already written a 6th class that we can add to the main body element to achieve just that.
So let's go ahead and use JavaScript to add and remove that class to the body element at the right times.
So over in our text editor and our theme folder, let's jump in to our JavaScript and then modules folder
and let's open up search jass.
And if we want to do something, as soon as the overlay is opened, we can just write a bit of code
within our open overlay method.
So right after this line of code where we add a class to the overlay div, let's just use query to target
the main body element, write the element that all HTML content lives within and then let's give it
a class.
So add class and the class name is Body Dash, no scroll.
So I've already written a CSC class with this name that will tell the element to use overflow hidden,
which will remove the ability to scroll.
So let's save that.
And then over in the browser you'll notice as soon as I open up the search overlay, I'm scrolling my
mouse wheel, but nothing happens.
Perfect.
However, once I closed the search overlay, now I'm still unable to scroll and that doesn't make much
sense.
Right.
So as soon as someone closes the overlay, let's just go ahead and remove that class that we just added
to the body element.
So within our close overlay method, let's add a new line, target the body element and let's just remove
a class instead of adding one with the same name body, no scroll.
OK, so now when you first load the page, you can scroll, open up the search overlay, you can no
longer scroll, but as soon as you close it, it's back to normal.
OK, now let's change gears.
The next thing I want to work on is keyboard shortcuts to open and close the overlay.
So I think it would be cool if you could press the esky on your keyboard s for search and that would
open up the overlay.
And then it would be nice if you could press the escape key on your keyboard to close the overlay.
So let's jump back into our JavaScript and make that happen.
Let's begin by focusing on our events area.
Right, because we want to respond to the event of a key being pressed now with our previous events,
these on click events.
We were only interested in the click event if a very particular element was getting clicked on.
But in this case of a key being pressed on a keyboard, it's not like we want a particular element to
be aware of it.
We want the entire page or browser in general to be on the lookout for key presses.
So here's what we can do on a new line within our events method.
Let's use G query to select the main document object.
And this is the Web browsers model of the entire current page.
All right.
And then that is what we can use the query on method with.
So just like we did up on these two lines, the on method takes two arguments.
The first is the event that you want to be on the lookout for.
So in this case, instead of click, let's go with KIYA.
And that's when a user releases or lifts up off a key that they just press down.
We will learn about Key down a bit later on.
But for now, let's go with key up.
OK, and then the second argument is the function or method that we want to call in response.
So just like on these two lines, we begin with this to look at the current object and then we can look
inside it for the name of one of our methods.
Right.
The methods are the actions that live down here.
So down here, let's say this dot, and then we get to make up a name for a method that we are going
to create in about ten seconds from now.
So the name doesn't matter.
I'm just going to make something up.
Why don't we call it key press despatcher.
And then while we're at it, why don't we use binde this so that within this.
I think the key word of this refers back to our main object, so right after this key press dispatcher,
let's say Dot, find this, OK, now we said that this is the name of the method that we want to call
when this happens.
So we better actually go and create a method with this name.
So down here in our methods area.
Let's just create a brand new method named Key Press, despatcher parentheses, curly brackets, and
before we worry about doing anything truly useful, why don't we add a bit of a test here just to make
sure things are working?
Why don't we say console, dot log?
This is how we can output a text message into the browser console log and within the parentheses, let's
say this is a test.
OK, so let's go ahead and save this.
And then over in the browser, I want you to open up the JavaScript console.
If you're using Google Chrome, you can always just click view up in the top menu.
And then under the developer menu, you can choose JavaScript console.
Another way to open the console, and this works in almost every browser, not just Google Chrome.
You can right.
Click anywhere on the page and choose.
Inspect.
And then within the pop up developer tools window just used the console tap.
OK, so here's my JavaScript console, and I'm going to resize my Web browser window so we can see the
console in the background.
And if I click back anywhere on to the main browser window and press a key on my keyboard, oh, looks
like it's not working.
Aha.
I see the problem.
So when we say on the key up event, the U in the word up should be lowercase instead of uppercase.
Sorry about that.
So keep up all lowercase case.
Let's save that again.
And now if I press a key on my keyboard, cool, we see our console dialogue.
This is a test message.
All right.
So now that we are successfully responding to the event of a key being pressed now, we need to get
more specific within our key press despatcher method.
Right.
Because we are not interested in just any key being pressed.
We are only interested in the esky and the escape key.
Right.
As for search, should open the search overlay and then the escape key should close the overlay.
So the question becomes, how do we differentiate between different key presses in JavaScript?
Well, the answer is something called a key code.
So in JavaScript, every key on your keyboard has a unique numerical key code.
So the question is, what is the numerical key code for the key on our keyboard?
Well, we could just go Google it, or I could tell you that it's the number 83.
But I want to show you a practical way that you can find out any key code number for yourself.
So in JavaScript, when we're looking out for the key or key down event, when JavaScript calls this
function in response, it's going to pass along a bit of information about the key press event into
this function.
So down here within the signature for that function, within the parentheses, we can make up a parameter
name so the name doesn't matter.
We could say event or we could even just save the letter E, so it's easy to type.
But now within the body of this method, we can look inside this parameter to find the information that
got passed along about the specific key press event.
So, for example, we can look inside that parameter and it has a properly named key code.
And this is the numerical code for whichever key on your keyboard was pressed.
So just as a test, let's delete this.
But inside our console log test message, instead of outputting a string of text, why don't we output
e dot key code?
So now if I save this and go back to the browser, if I press the key, we can see eighty three.
If I press the escape key we see twenty seven.
And you could press any other key on your keyboard to find out the key code for whatever you're interested
in.
Right.
So if you want to find the key code for the letter B, just press B you can see it's sixty six.
If you're interested in the letter Z press it can see it's 90.
OK, but back to our specific task.
We are interested in the S and the escape key.
So again, the letter S is eighty three.
So back within our key despatcher method, let's do this underneath this test line, let's use an if
statement.
So let's say only if parentheses curly brackets and let's say only if the key that was just pressed
has a key code of eighty three, which is the key.
Only then do we want to fire the open overlay method in response.
So for the if condition we can just say if e key code equals 83, remember that when you're checking
for equality it's equal, equal sign two of them instead of just a single equal sign that we use when
we are asserting equality.
Right.
Like when you assign a value to a variable.
So if the key that was pressed is the key, then inside of the body for this if statement, let's just
call and run our open overlay method so we can just say this dot open overlay and parentheses to actually
call the function.
OK, let's go ahead and save that and give it a test so I will press the key on my keyboard.
Perfect, it opened up the overlay.
Now let's do the same thing for the escape key and closing the overlay.
So right now, if you press the escape key, you can see that it has a numerical code of 27.
So back in our function right below this if statement, let's just create another if statement and say
if parentheses curly brackets for the condition will say if e docky code equals 27, then fire the closed
method.
So this dot close overlay.
Let's give that a save aski to open it, escape key to close it, perfect, except you might notice
that if you press down the esky and hold it down without letting go of it, you'll notice that our overlay
doesn't open until you actually let go of the key.
Now, that's not a big deal, but it can create a little bit of a lagi feeling because the event doesn't
fire as soon as you press the key, but instead a few milliseconds later when you let go of the key.
Now, the reason we are seeing this behavior is because we chose to use the Web browsers key up event.
The key up event is the moment when a key is released or let go of, whereas the key down event happens
the millisecond that you first press down on a key.
However, there's another key difference between key up and key down.
Key up will only fire once, but key down will fire again and again and again as long as you hold down
the key.
Now every browser is different.
Some might fire the event every five milliseconds or every five hundred milliseconds.
But let me show you what I'm talking about.
So if we set this to key down, save it and give it another try.
If I hold down on the key without letting go of it, you'll notice that the overlay opens immediately.
But as I'm holding down the key noticed that that event just keeps firing again and again and again.
You can see the count going up.
And if I press down the escape key and keep holding it down, you can see the same thing, right?
So it looks like a key down is firing multiple times per second if you just keep holding down on the
key.
Now, in this particular example, nothing bad is happening by running that event again and again and
again.
It's not a very costly event to run.
So it's not like it's going to freeze someone's Web browser.
However, I don't want us to get in the bad habit of writing code that could potentially lock up the
browser.
Right.
There's no need to run the same method again and again and again like this.
So why don't we write a bit of code so that you can only close the overlay if it's currently open and
you can only open the overlay if it's currently closed.
So that way, even if someone holds down a key and fires the key down event again and again and again,
we won't actually be calling our opening closed methods needlessly.
The appropriate method will be called once as needed.
In this way, we never risk overloading or freezing a Web browser.
Now, in order to test this out, why don't we do this?
Why don't we go ahead and delete this console log message where we output the key code of what's being
pressed?
We no longer need that now that we know the codes for the S and escape key.
So let's delete that line.
And then just as a test within our opened and closed methods, why don't we output a message so that
we can see each time the method is being ran?
So within our open overlay method, let's console the log and say our open method just ran and then
we can do the same thing in our close overlay.
So at the end of this method, just run console, dot log and let's say our closed method just ran.
So now if we save that and I hold down the key without letting go of it, we can see that that method
just keeps getting fired again and again and again.
So now we can clearly see what we are trying to avoid.
So all we need to do now is up within our key press despatcher method when we say only if the key code
that's being pressed is eighty-three, only then should you fire this method.
We just want to add on another condition within these parentheses to say only if the key is eighty-three
and if the overlay is not already open.
So we could technically use Jake.
We're here to check to see if the main overlay div has a class of search overlay active.
But reading from the DOM is very, very slow in comparison to just reading from a JavaScript variable
or property.
So in order to keep your code as fast as possible, you should always avoid dealing with the DOM, if
at all possible.
So instead of using query here to check if a div has a certain class, why don't we go up into our constructor
function and let's create a new property that stores a little bit of information about the state of
the overlay.
So this dot, let's create a new property and let's name it is overlay open.
I just made up this name.
You could choose whatever you want, but let's set its default or starting value to false, right?
Because when you first come to the page, the overlay is not open and now we can just change the value
of this property any time are open or closed methods run so down within our open overlay method at the
end of this method, let's just adjust that property.
So this dot is overlay open.
Let's set it to true.
Right, because after this method runs, the overlay will be open.
Said it's true.
And then in our closed function or closed method, let's set it to false.
This dot is overlay open equals false.
Cool.
So now within our key press, despatcher within our if statements, instead of looking at the DOM to
see if that div has a class, we can just check our property, which is lightning fast.
So we only want to open the overlay if it's currently closed.
So we can just say if the key code that was pressed is eighty-three and just to ampersands symbols and
if this dot is overlay open, if that is false.
So you could say equals false.
But another way of doing it is you can just place an exclamation point or exclamation mark right before
it.
So altogether, together, only if the key that was just pressed is eighty-three.
And if the overlay is not currently open, then run open overlay and let's do the same thing for the
escape key.
So only if the escape key was pressed and if the overlay is currently open do we want to be able to
close it so we can say this dot is overlayed open.
Right.
And if that property is set to true, this will evaluate to true.
So now if we save this and go back to the browser, if I press the key and keep holding it down, you'll
notice that that method does not get ran again and again.
It just runs once.
Cool.
And if I press and hold the escape key, it also only runs once.
And that's actually going to bring this lesson to a close.
In our next lesson, we will learn how to manage time in JavaScript.
So, for example, when someone starts searching for Buyology, we don't want to send a search request
when all they've typed in is the letter B, so we don't want to send a search request as soon as someone
starts or stops typing instead.
Why don't we wait until they've paused or stopped typing for maybe 800 milliseconds or a full second?
So, for example, when they type in B, that would start a timer, but then if they type in another
letter, it would reset the timer and would just continue on like that until they indeed finish typing
and pause.
This way, we avoid flooding the WordPress server with requests that don't even make sense.
Right.
We don't actually want to search the WordPress database for B or below.
You get the idea.
So we will learn how to manage time, how to work with timers, and then in the lesson after that,
we will learn how to talk to the WordPress database and retrieve real content in real time on the fly.
This is going to be a ton of fun.
Let's keep things rolling and I will see you in the next lesson.